This video is brought to you by curiosity stream,
a subscription streaming service that offers over 2000 documentaries and
non-fiction titles.
You can get unlimited access for just $2 99 a month and 30 days for free.
If you sign up a curiosity, stream.com/biographics and use the code,
biographics more unlimited bit
Vivion that sounded more French. When you hear the words, Mexican revolution,
which historical figure do you immediately picture?
We're guessing it's Pancho the sombrero wearing gun.
Toting Robin hood bandit,
who infamously the town of Columbus New Mexico in 1916,
Bal via is the revolutionary who gets all the press.
He was far from the most respected,
most influential or even most interesting. Nope. That honor,
instead goes to a Machio horse trainer from the impoverished state of morale
Soman who began his life with was nothing and wound up reshaping.
The whole of Mexico.
That revolutionary name Eliana is a pat born in a small village during the
heyday of the PFU and dictatorship Zapata's life should have passed in blisful
obscurity yet a combination of circumstance and timing wound up thrusting him
into the spotlight just a as Mexico exploded an uncompromising supporter of
land rights for the poor,
a general capable of conquering Mexico city and a tragic folk hero who died
for his cause.
This is the story of Mexico's greatest revolutionary
For a man identified so closely with revolution.
It's a mild historical irony that AME ZPA was born just as the
greatest period of Mexican upheaval ended in eighteen seventy six,
three years before Zapata's birth.
The decades of unrest that had followed independence came to a close when
general porphyria Diaz seized the pre uttering in a long period
of stability and growth known as the Prato.
But don't go thinking that stable means popular. The Prato was a dictatorship.
The elections were rigged.
Dissent was crushed and the lower classes were locked out of power and nowhere
suffered under DSS, perfumed boot,
more than Zapatas state of Morales in 1879.
The year of Zapata's birth Morales was Mexico's newest state,
small blob of mountainous terrain, not a hundred kilometers from Mexico city.
It was also one of the poorest seriously Morales's major commodity was dirt,
poor peasants, farming, dirt, poor lands,
and this poor quality dirt was about to cause a massive problem for generations.
The villages in such relies on communal land to produce enough crops to avoid
starvation, but now porphyria was empowered.
He couldn't care less about communal land rights.
While the porphyria turned a blind eye, wealthy land owners known as has,
and dados started aggressively occupying communal land in Morells.
This is actually a story it's probably apocryphal that when the millions of pat
was just nine, he witnessed his father Bri down, crying after a has,
and Dardo fenced off. And, or at first the villages of Mars,
they tried to fight by they petitioned officials. They staged protests.
They even tried to hire lawyers,
but the PTO was propped up by the same people stealing their land as well.
What was POY di gonna do arrest the has and Datos keeping him in power falls of
powder. Growing up in mores meant growing up in a world where has,
and DAS could not just steal lands without consequent,
but they could kill anyone who got in their way.
There's a famous story about one village lawyer who took his case against DHA.
Dardo all the way toy ideas himself Diaz shook the guy's hands,
told him he'd look into it and then had the lawyer thrown into a labor camp.
And that's where things stood ins just before the Mexican revolution broke out a
bunch of voiceless off peasants,
desperately crying for a leader to stand up for their rights.
Luckily for them Milanas a pat was about to answer that. Cool.
So that's the world as a pattern inhabited, but what about the man himself?
Who was the, a guy who was about to fight fors?
And the honor Zapata was born on August the eighth,
1879 in the village of an Akeo,
just one of the many's villages, losing vital lands the house in dartos,
but it was Zapata's village was dirt poor. The man himself was not.
The family Zapata was born into was actually kind of doing okay,
at least by Mexican peasant standards.
They had one of the biggest houses in the village and Zapata's father was a
respected horse trainer. This career, it evidently rubbed off on the young land.
And by the time he was a teenager,
Zapata was one of the best horse trainers in Mors with even the Hasen datas
after his expertise, this would turn out to be a very useful,
great to have not long after Zapata turn 17.
Both his parents unfortunately died the following year,
1897 Z pat took part in a land rights protest and was arrested and
drafted into the pian army. But when he was discharged, six months later,
it wasn't into poverty with Zapata, senior dead and Zapata in the army.
The super rich hasn't had become super desperate for a great horse trader and
NAZA powder was back. They were willing to pay big bucks, Foz powder.
This was almost like being gifted, a bottomless piggy bank.
He competed in races in rodeos.
He Hawk his skills to whoever could afford them while he certainly never got
rich. He did get K not poor, not poor enough to afford,
not just fancy clothes,
but also the bucket loads of wax that presumably took to maintain his
glorious mustache as about's local fame group.
So did his interest in politics,
a possibly fake story about Zapata watching his father weep over and enclosed
orchard? Well, Zapata certainly seems to have remembered it because in 1906,
he began sitting in on village meetings about how to stop has dollars being such
land stealing by 19 0 8,
20 5% of all land ins was owned by a near 17 families.
Given that the 75% was mostly low quality stuff that those families didn't want.
This was a serious issue,
but Zapata wasn't ready to pick up a gun and fight to make things fairer.
This was 1908.
The POY had stood for 32 years so long that revolting against it
just seemed impossible. Yet. 90 0 8 was a, also the year.
The foundations of the por fury would be destroyed by an unlikely
source. And that source was porphyria Diaz himself.
If you've ever accidentally blurted something else only to immediately regret it
just no, there's no way you've ever regretted it.
As much as porphyria Diaz in 1908 Diaz gave an interview to the American
journalist James Kilman.
That was supposed to be full of softball questions that Kilman could then write
up into a vomit inducing puff piece. Unfortunately,
Kilman just happened to ask what would happen when Diaz in his seventies became
too old to run Mexico. It's here.
That Diaz didn't just stick his foot in his mouth,
but he practically swallowed his own legs.
Diaz declared that Mexico would become a democracy.
He said that he would step down in 1910 and allow a fair election to choose his
successor.
I've waited patiently for the day when people of the Mexican Republic would be
prepared to choose and change their government at every election.
I believe that day has come. Now,
this was all just the highest grade of cattle done.
Diaz just wanted to sound good tore men's American readers,
but Diaz forgot to tell anyone in Mexico that he was lying.
So in the interview was published in Fe 1908. Everyone was suddenly all like,
is this for real to which PFU ideas basically replies? Uh, yeah. Well,
I mean, I guess,
and so began the slow implosion of the PFU down in Morales
in Emiliana was one of those looking to test years' word.
The state governor had just died and local elite said put in a Jack to replace
him. So as a pattern and some other village leaders decided to run their own
candidate. If Diaz was for real, he'd let them campaign.
And he did do everyone surprise ZPA,
and the others were able to travel to Morales,
drumming up support for their guy. This meant so pattern,
meaning many of the movers and shakers in other villagers and getting his name
out across the state, along with his candidates come,
the more election in February,
1909 as the batters group were certain they would win. But well, no.
At the last moment,
Diaz remembered he was meant to be a dictator and he rigged the vote.
The new Morales,
governor lost no time hiking taxes on the villages that had supported Zapata's
candidate as a warning to never vote against Diaz. Again,
to say this made Zapata furious is kind of like saying Crackower made a bit of a
bang from this point on.
He was no longer going to play the porphyria's game.
If he years wasn't going to change by his own accord,
maybe it was time that someone forced him. The following year, 1910,
Z Zapata made his first stand a local Hasard had fenced off a
communal hillside. So Zapata armed,
80 men went up to that hillside and tore the fences down for his trouble.
He got labeled a bandit and had to flee into the mountains so far. Well,
so impressive, but something was about to happen in wider Mexico.
That would change Zapatas fortunes.
While those in Morales had got an early warning that Diaz wasn't really gonna
allow fair elections, the rest of Mexico. Hadn't got the message.
So come the 1910 election,
a wealthy liberal named Francisco Madera ran against Diaz and
crucially. Everyone decided to vote for him.
And suddenly Diaz was faced with a country full of people,
desperate to see the back of him. Of course, Diaz didn't let that vote happen.
True to TA he had Madera arrested and declare himself winner of a new
presidential term,
but Diaz had unleashed a very powerful genie with the Creelman interview,
a genie called hope. And once that particular genie was outta the bottle, well,
it was impossible to put back later that year sympathizes helped Francisco
Madera, escape, Mexico, and get into the us. Then Madera made AOUS decision.
If Diaz wasn't going to leave voluntarily Madera would force him out at gun
points. Now just before get into the revolution that is obviously coming.
I want to take a quick moment to tell you about today's sponsor curiosity
stream.
Curiosity stream is a subscription streaming service that offers over 2000
documentaries and nonfiction titles from some of the world's best filmmakers,
including exclusive originals.
So if you are looking for a specific recommendation from me while I'll
definitely check out 101 events that made the 20th century,
if you're enjoying this video,
if you enjoy our videos about 20th century figures,
that's gonna be a great fit for you. Uh, well, it's a serious program,
obviously. It's also pretty chilled out. There's this Australian guy in era. It,
which kind of adds that he does a great job. It's super in engaging, uh,
just a really enjoyable program.
I would definitely check that one out curiosity.
Stream's available on many platforms, Roku, Android, Xbox one, uh, you know,
all the stuff on your smart TV, everywhere like that, and also worldwide.
So if you're watching this and you're like, oh, you know,
this is one of those ones I can only get if I'm in America,
not the case with curiosity,
stream and limits and access starts at just 2 99 a month. And for our audience,
I see you guys. You can get 30 days for free,
a curiosity stream.com/biographics use the code
biographics when you sign up and, uh, yeah.
Get yourself some curiosity stream. It's a great way to support the show.
It keeps us making more videos and I just couldn't really think of a more
aligned sponsor really? So go check it out. Let's get to that revolution
Today. Mexico celebrates November the 20th as a public holiday ands.
That's when Madera declared his revolution against Diaz.
But if he had been in Mexico on November the 20th, 1910,
you'd have barely noticed that's because Madera's call to arms was heated by
no one. Well almost no one.
The only reason November the 20th has gone down in history is because one of the
few people to he Madera's call was Pancho Villa and via was a guy
who knew how to do a revolution. What about Zapata?
How did he respond to Madera's call? Well,
he didn't really do anything down in Morales Zapata. Couldn't give a cat goad.
What Pancho was doing way up in the north. He wanted Diaz gone,
but it's not like Madeira was promising the land reform in early 1911 though.
Things changed on March the 11th,
Madeira crossed back into Mexico to take control of the growing revolutionary
army almost immediately.
They started absolutely whatting Diaz's guys in battle.
SOPA now faced an urgent choice either on pond to this revolutionary bandwagon
and hope things worked out or step back from the brink and wait for the next
opportunity.
Saada jumped that may Zapata's peasant army managed to capture the city of QLA
at the same time,
Pancho via seized sea dad ho faced with multiple revolutionary armies on
multiple fronts. Di saw the writing on the wall on may the 25th,
1911 por Furio Diaz resigned and boarded a boat to Europe.
He would die in exile just four years later. Fair warning here.
Diaz is just about the only person in this video who is not going to
die violently in the wake of Diaz's fight.
And presidents took over for the sole purpose of organizing new elections.
Since knew that Madeira would win the new interim.
President asked the revolutionary armies to stand down two,
which Zapata replied. Nah, we, we are good and properly captured quite Ava.
If that seems strange to you just to know that Zapata had been burned before he
wasn't going to end his rebellion until Madeira had committed to land reform
that June the two men finally met in Mexico city to discuss the issue while
Madeira didn't give any firm commitments,
Zapata did leave the meeting thinking Madeira was an honest man,
which he could do business with. He was so convinced of this,
that even when the federal army attacked Morales under the blood thirsty
general,
Victorian Huta Zapata thought it was all the interim president's fault.
He thought that Madeira put an end to all of it when he was finally elected.
And to that, we just have to say that, well,
the better you are in for a bit of a nasty surprise that
October,
1911 Madera won the presidency in a landslide almost immediately.
He dispatched an agent to negotiate with Zapata. At first things went well.
The agent seemed super enter Zapata's ideas on land reform.
And it really looked like things were going somewhere.
And then it all went wrong.
Either acting under secret orders or because it'd gone rogue a general in the
federal army, surrounded Zapata's men in middle of negotiations.
When ZPA tried to desperately contact Madera, he got an odd message back.
We will negotiate Madera assure him,
but only if you surrender unconditionally, this was the last straws.
Batter broke off negotiations, taking a small band of men.
He flins the Morales mountains bitter at his apparent betrayal.
It was clearly time for another revolution. Only this time.
It would be as a pat leading the charge
At this point,
you may be wondering why is the pat is a guy who deserves a biographics video?
Sure. He helps overthrow one dictator, but there's gotta be more right. Well,
there is.
And it's known as the plan of I issued by Zapata on November the 28th,
1911 bar, three weeks after Madeira double crossed him.
The plan of I is still one of history's key revolutionary texts,
a radical agrarian manifesto.
It would go on to influence nearly every Latin American revolutionary since and
well, there are lots of Latin American revolutionaries.
So what was it at its heart?
The plan of I was a vision for a farer world based on land redistribution
while it comprised of 15 points, most of them were just trash talking Madera.
So, or concentrate strictly on points, six through eight in a bridge form.
They go something like this 0.6 communal land seized by has,
and datas will be given back to villages 0.71 third of all,
land held by the rich will be ex appropriate and given to the poor.
So everyone has a chance to improve their lot in life.
Land owners will be compensated 0.8.
Those who resist 0.7 will have their lands nationalized without with
the government using this land to create a fund for war widows and the very
poorest the plan of,
I wasn't so much a game changer as it was the creation of a whole new game.
At the time it was written the Russian revolution.
It was still several years off.
The idea of a revolt that put the very poorest in society at its heart was near
unprecedented.
This was a really radical document and it was really gonna blow up Mexico,
that wind revolts against the Madeira government inspired by the plan broke out
across Mexico. So the governments, well, they fought far with fire Morales.
The federal army took Zapata family hostage.
They started burning down villages and funneling the survivors into
concentration camps matter him couldn't have run a better recruitment campaign.
As the atrocities mounted his ranks of gorilla fighters.
They swelled to the tens of thousands.
Not that Zapata ran anything like a regular army though.
His soldiers were peasants.
They often took up arms when needed only to put them down again.
The moment the battle was won and they'd go back to farming nor was the pat
actually their leader. Yet at first,
the peasants in Morales fought in small decentralized groups who occasionally
came together to take a city or whatever it wasn't until early 1913,
that Zapata could really be said to be in charge.
And by then his zapper army was on the verge of taking Mexico city.
When he issued the plan of I ZBA had also issued a promise to March into
Mexico city and personally hang Madera from a tree come early, 1913.
It really looked like he was gonna do it. But fate had other ideas,
an attempted co broke out in Mexico city led by P Furo Diaz's nephew,
Felix Diaz,
while Madera managed a hunker down safely in the presidential palace.
He couldn't defeat the insurrectionists. So he called in general Cueto.
The guy we last met killing civilians in Cueto, took one,
look at the mounting death toll and decided that he could use this for his own
ends on February the 17th QTA switch sides backed by the us ambassador.
He convinced Madera to surrender. Then he had Madera loaded into a car,
driven to a secluded spot and shot debt in the aftermath of the 10 tragic days,
QTA sideline, Felix Diaz, and had himself declared presidents.
His first act was to send a messenger to the batter to see if he wanted to join
forces. And this was the beginning of a new era in the Mexican revolution.
And it wouldn't end until nearly all its players were dead.
The dictatorship of general Huta was as short and as pointless
as a blow up Napoleon sex. Do Wes par got QAs offered to join forces.
It was all. Uh, dude, weren't you the guys killing all those villages?
I more else? No. And then about went straight back to fighting,
but QA was also unpopular outside of Zapatas Creek in the north Pancho Villa
restarted his revolution in the state of Quora here.
Governor Carranza declared himself in rebellion and raised army known as the
constitutional lists before QTA could even warm the president's chair.
His regime was crumbling on all sides.
It didn't help that QTA was basically trying to be the new PIO Diaz. Nope.
Even those who supported his coup didn't want to live under a Poria tribute act
by mid 1914,
the combined pressure of the Soat Easter pan Chaves army and corre
constitutionalists had left Q a a dictator incapable of dictating
to anyone on July. The 14th QTA resigns ends fled Mexico.
Although he would later try to reenter the country and raise a new army Hebe
arrested at the border by us. Authorities he'd died in prison in 1916,
but while Hu's departure was a win for the revolutionaries,
it also made things a thousand times worse.
The problem was that Zapata via and Carranza were all in this fight for
different reasons.
Zapata wanted land reform and to hell with everything else via wanted money and
fame and to hang with some elites while Carranza wanted to be president without
knowing why,
when QTA fled all three of them started eyeing one another sideways,
like the three Cowboys at the end of the good, the bad and the ugly,
knowing that they're going to have to draw pistols on one another,
but unsure until the last seconds who they were gonna going to shoot Zapata
finally made his decision in the fall.
After a failed meeting between the three revolutionary armies Zapata got
frustrated and ordered as men to March on Mexico city on the 24th of November,
Kanza fled the city ahead of 25,000 armed Zapatistas. Incidentally,
those Zapatistas were also overwhelmed by the capital that instead of raid it,
they went barefoot from door to door, shy asking for food and water,
but Zara hadn't taken the city to show off.
He was there to do business on December the sixth,
that business finally arrived.
Pan Villa rode into Mexico city at the head of an even bigger army than Zapatas.
The two men met at the presidential palace to work out the basis of an Alliance.
The basis was this. It would both work to lock Carranza out of power in returns.
ZPA would get his land reform while via would get a civilian president.
One whose name likely rhymed with Banro beer.
As these two great revolutionaries left the palace.
They must have felt their time had finally come and that they were unstoppable.
Neither man knew that the high water mark of the revolution had already come and
had already gone.
All it was left now was for the two of them to be swallowed by the waves
No long after his meeting with via Zapata abandoned Mexico city.
Back in Morales, he started putting the plan of IA into act in practice.
This meant redistributing lands. However,
he saw fit mostly that involved appropriating Hasian, but Saba,
he wasn't above burning them to the ground.
If the local house and data refused to comply,
the Zapp baristas even set up a rural loan bank,
helping peasants to buy their own pots to farm.
It was a transformation for one that SA outer was sure would provide a
template for the entire country.
He even contacted Woodrow Wilson's white house to see if they fancied
recognizing him as Mexico's legitimate president,
the white house passed on the offer.
But whatever high is about was feeling in early 1915,
it was about to be lost forever as was his newest ally in April pane fought
Correas force of the battle of Solia via used his classicness suicidal
cavalry charge, which in this case turned out to be completely suicidal.
Avaro Agon had been studying tactics from world war I and used machine guns to
mow down via army by the end of the battle via was alive,
but no longer a threat. That meant there was nothing to stop Carranza,
turning his attention solely on Zapata that October the United States officially
recognized Carranza as Mexico's head of state around the same time the federal
army moved into Moreos determined to bring Zapata to heal. Once again,
villages were burned. Once again, civilians were killed,
but this time Zapata didn't just flee to the Hills as a noble folk hero.
He tried to fight back using Carranza own tactics.
The results left indelible blood stands on Zapata's legacy in November, 1916,
Zappas bombed two passenger trains heading into Mexico city.
The terror attack killed almost 400 P double the death to of the 2004
Madrid train bombings. While the slaughter didn't dense, the pats popularity,
INEOS it left him isolated in the rest of Mexican society.
The final nail in the coffin came in early 1917 after months of deliberation,
Correa promulgated new constitution. That basically ripped off the plan of,
I it opens the door for appropriations,
for nationalization of communal lands for redistribution,
for a fairer society where peasants were actually treated as humans for most
Mexicans, the constitution of 1917 made the pats of fight seem pretty pointless.
It was sort of a case of, well, dude, you've already won to stop fighting,
but it about a wouldn't stop or maybe he couldn't.
And realistically who could make him, he was still popular.
iNOS no matter how many trains about bomb,
no matter how many constitutions Corrine are issued, nothing would change.
The fact that MAOS was going to stand by Zapata to the bitter end
Soza simply made sure that that end was quicker and more bitter than anyone.
One had expected in 1919,
a federal general fighting in Morales named Hazel Gudo abruptly switched sides.
His unit turned on the other federal forces killing 59 people.
When he got the news Zapata arranged a meeting with Gudo to bring him into the
SAPAC fold. Gudo suggested that they meet in a remote Hacienda.
Apparently having never heard of the concept of a trap Zapata agreed on April
the 10th, 1919,
a Zapata and 10 armed men rode to the abandoned Hass ender to negotiate
with Gudo before Zapata could even open his mouth dozens and dozens of fellow
soldiers opened fire from their hiding places.
The revolutionary never stood a chance S died that Dan hell of bullets,
just like the latest Mexican revolutionary to meet a violent fate.
He would not be the last barely a year later on may.
The 21st Carranza would be assassinated turn by his former general Avaro
Agon Aragon's block would blast a little longer before he too was assassinated
in 1928, by then the only other leader to survive.
The revolution was also debt Pancho was gunned down in 1923 in an ambush,
not unlike the one that killed Zapata and just to tie things up,
we should probably mention that Gudo was also assassinated after helping arrange
the Pat's assassination,
because apparently that's just how things roll in revolutionary Mexico.
And like I said, at the beginning, this video,
we did warn you that everyone was gonna die violently at the end of all that
bloodshed, what did Alion Asata really achieve?
Why don't we still know his name today for an answer to that,
just look back at the plan of I in the decade of the revolution land reform had
gone from a drum being banged by a few obsessed peasants in more to
something the whole of Mexico cared about.
Even though Carranza 1917 constitution was scrapped after he was assassinated
elements of the plan of I still crept into its successor. Even today,
it affect how many in Latin America think about land rights,
but Zapata was more than just a guy who wrote an influential plan. In his years,
as a revolutionary Zapata became famous as someone who cared about the poor,
who was uncompromising in his beliefs,
who was willing to stand up to a rotten system. He was far from a perfect man,
but he was also something more than a mere human. He was a focus hero,
a Robin hood who existed a myth brought to life for all his
faults. I mean the honors of pat is one folk hero.
The world will never forget. So I hope you found that video. Interesting.
If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below and don't forget to check it off.
Fantastic sponsor curiosity, stream link to them below.
Don't forget to use the code biographics to try it for free and as always,
thank you for watching.